Story Recapped here.
Today I'm going to explain a Sci-fi drama
film called The Butterfly Effect.
Spoilers ahead!
Watch out and take care.
Evan Treborn has been suffering from blackouts
as a child.
He remembers nothing during those times, but
it often occurs during the most significant
moments of his childhood.
Some of these incidents happened when he spent
time with his best friends Lenny, Kayleigh,
and her brother Tommy.
His mother Andrea first noticed the blackouts
when Evan was just seven years old.
While Andrea was dropping Evan off at school,
his teacher, Mrs Boswell, asked her to stay
behind for a moment to discuss an artwork
drawn by Evan.
While other children drew wholesome pictures,
Evan's work depicted a man holding a bloody
knife in his hand standing close to two lifeless
bodies of men on the ground.
Evan doesn't remember creating the gruesome
drawing, so his mother decided to take him
to a psychiatric hospital for a checkup.
As they await Evan's neurological exam results,
Andrea expresses her concern to the doctor
that Evan might have inherited an illness
from his father.
The doctor suggests that Evan should start
keeping a journal to help him with his memory
loss.
Evan takes the doctor's advice and starts
writing down the things he is doing for the
day.
In the first entry of his journal, he notes
that he will be meeting up with Kayleigh and
Tommy for a playdate at their place.
He also mentions that this would be the first
time he will meet their father, Mr Miller,
face to face.
While preparing to leave, Andrea becomes witness
to one of Evan's blackouts.
She sees Evan in the kitchen holding a large
knife with a blank stare in his eyes.
When he asks the boy about the utensil, he
drops it on the floor and tells her that he
can't remember.
When they arrive at the Millers, Kayleigh
tells him that their dad is shooting a movie
with his new camera.
Mr Miller tells Evan that he is going to be
the star of the flick.
When Tommy complains about getting the starring
role, his father snaps at him.
Mr Miller asks Evan to promise not to tell
anyone else about the movie.
After agreeing to keep Mr Miller's secret,
he blacks out and regains consciousness in
the basement.
Evan finds himself in front of Mr Miller's
camera with his clothes on the floor.
When Evan asked Mr Miller how he got there,
the man asks him to do what he's told.
He notices Kayleigh beside him, but she remains
silent even when he asks her what's happening.
Meanwhile, Tommy angrily twists the neck of
a doll while watching them from the stairs.
Andrea goes back to the doctor to ask about
the results of Evan's tests.
The doctor confirmed that the tests didn't
show any physical damage to his brain.
He asserted that stress might be causing the
blackouts and suggested that it could be due
to difficulties coping with his father's absence.
Andrea remembered that Evan had been asking
to see his father for a while.
The doctor tells her that a controlled meeting
between the two could help alleviate Evan's
stress.
Evan writes about the meeting with his father,
Jason, in his journal on their way to the
hospital.
He indicates that he is aware of his father's
mental illness, but the boy is still hoping
that he gets to call him "dad."
The doctor tells him that his father might
be a little sleepy because of the medication.
When his dad arrives in the designated meeting
room, he immediately assures Evan that it's
safe to be with him.
Jason asks the boy if he had seen pictures
of him.
Evan starts telling his father about their
similar features, but he suddenly experiences
a blackout.
When he woke up, his father was strangling
him, saying, "I love you."
The guards rush in to the room to stop him.
During the struggle, a guard hits Jason in
the head with a baton.
Jason falls to the floor, bleeding and lifeless.
Six years after his father's death, Evan and
his friends have now taken up smoking and
other questionable habits.
One day, while hanging out at the Miller's,
the group decides to blow up something with
a stick of dynamite to alleviate their boredom.
Tommy compels Lenny into blowing up a mailbox.
Lenny refuses, fearing that the explosive
might blow up too soon.
Evan steps in and stuffs the fuse into a lit
cigarette.
He tells Lenny that the fuse should now last
at least two minutes before the dynamite explodes.
Lenny puts the dynamite into the mailbox and
runs back to his friends.
Evan covers Kayleigh's ears while waiting
for the mailbox to blow up, but he blacks
out before the explosion.
When Evan regains consciousness, they are
already running deep into the woods.
He and Tommy have been carrying Lenny, who
appears to be awake but unresponsive.
While Lenny is loaded into an ambulance, Andrea
asks Evan what happened.
Evan insists that he blacked out and can't
remember anything.
When Andrea tells him that he can't use his
condition as an excuse, he tears up, convincing
his mother that he is telling the truth.
Sitting alone in the attic, Evan decides to
write down the incident in his journal.
His pencil breaks mid-sentence, so he starts
looking for something else he could use.
During his search, he sees a box labelled
with his father's name.
Inside, he finds a few pictures, and an envelope
marked "Dad's death certificate."
He looks at the paper and discovers that his
grandfather, Edward, was committed at the
Bellevue Institute.
He concludes that his grandfather also had
a mental illness.
Evan has agreed to undergo hypnosis to remember
the incident that leads to Lenny's catatonic
state.
He remembers covering Kayleigh's ears to protect
her.
Evan recalls a car arriving but struggles
to tell the doctor anything else.
The doctor tries to convince Evan that he's
not in danger, but the boy remains agitated
and starts shaking violently.
As his nose starts bleeding, the doctor decides
to stop the session.
Evan wakes up, not remembering anything about
the hypnosis.
Later on, Andrea drops off Evan at the cinema
to meet up with Kayleigh and Tommy.
When Evan asks his friends what happened to
the mailbox, Tommy shoves him violently to
the wall and tells him not to mention the
incident again.
The three friends go inside the cinema to
watch a movie, but Kayleigh leaves in the
middle of the flick.
Evan follows her and tries to console her,
but she winces in pain after he touches her
shoulder.
Evan sees the large bruise on her arm and
finds out that her dad had beaten her up.
He tells her that she doesn't deserve that
beating and kisses her.
Tommy sees them kissing and yells at them.
As he walks over to them, he is tripped by
an older kid, causing him to fall on the floor.
Tommy starts beating up the kid who tripped
him, but he stares angrily at Evan and Kayleigh
while doing it.
Kayleigh and Evan look on in shock as Tommy
is being dragged away by the guards.
While washing dishes in the kitchen, Andrea
hears a news story about a dynamite explosion
resulting in a tragedy.
The news indicated that there are still no
suspects connected to the blast.
Andrea later tells Evan that they will be
leaving town soon.
Kayleigh and Evan find out that Lenny is now
at home, so they visit him.
As the three kids take a trip and walk out
in the woods, they notice a cloud of smoke
coming from a yard.
They quickly run to the source and see that
Tommy has put Evan's dog in a sack and is
trying to light it up on fire.
Tommy quickly grabs a plank and tries to hit
Evan with it.
Evan manages to dodge it, but Kayleigh gets
struck in the head.
Tommy beats up Evan and tries to light up
the dog on fire again.
Evan gets up and charges Tommy, but he blacks
out before reaching him.
He wakes up to see his dog burned to cinders.
As Evan and his mom were about to leave town,
Kayleigh runs to their house, hoping to see
him one last time.
Knowing that they won't be able to talk, Evan
writes her a note, saying he'll come back
for her.
Evan, now aged 20, has decided to study psychology
in college.
One night, he asks his roommate Thumper to
celebrate with him because he hasn't experienced
a blackout in seven years.
They go to the bar for a few drinks and a
game of pool, but things turn sour when frat
boys start making fun of Thumper.
After leaving the bar, Evan goes back to his
dorm room with his date.
She sits on the bed and notices Evan's journal
as he grabs her a drink.
She convinces Evan to read a few sentences
from the journal.
As he reads, he starts remembering the incidents
described in his notes.
He notices his surroundings shake as he continues
to read.
Evan soon finds himself reliving the time
when he tried to stop Tommy from lighting
up his dog on fire.
Lenny was desperately trying to open up the
sack to free the dog, but he stops when Tommy
threatened to kill his mother in her sleep.
Tommy castigates Evan for kissing Kayleigh
as he lights up the dog on fire.
Evan wakes up as soon as Tommy puts the fire
against the sack.
His date tells he was just dreaming, but he
says that it felt very real.
Still bothered by the experience, he visits
Lenny to ask him what happened that day.
Lenny repeats Tommy's threat about killing
his mother.
Evan goes back to his dorm, convinced that
the incident he saw in his dream happened.
He reads from his notes again and goes back
to the time when they were blowing up the
mailbox.
He is stunned by the sudden shift in his surroundings
and drops a lit cigarette on his shirt.
As they observe a car arriving at the house,
Evan feels the cigarette burning through his
shirt and onto his skin, leaving a burn mark.
The owner of the house gets out of the car
carrying her baby.
Kayleigh breathes a sigh of relief as they
see the woman walk toward her home, but relief
turned quickly into dread when they see the
lady walk back to the mailbox, still carrying
her baby.
They witness the dynamite explode as soon
as the lady opens the box.
Shocked by what he saw, Lenny stands frozen,
staring at the distance while the three others
run away.
Tommy and Evan come back for Lenny and carry
him away on their shoulders.
When Evan wakes up, he checks his tummy and
sees the scar left by the cigarette burn.
Evan later goes out for dinner with his mother,
and he starts asking her about his dad.
Andrea tells him that Jason had a good memory.
She further reveals that Jason had claimed
to have found a way to remember his past when
he was the same age as Evan.
Andrea tries to tell Evan that Jason claimed
to have another ability but failed to say
what it was.
She noted that his father was already too
sick by that time.
After leaving the restaurant, Evan asks Andrea
again about Jason's ability.
Andrea changes the subject by convincing Evan
to try palm reading for fun.
As soon as the palm reading starts, the psychic
tells Evan that he has no lifeline.
She further asserted that Evan has no soul
and was not meant to exist.
Andrea later tells Evan that she had miscarried
twice before he was born.
She considered Evan her miracle baby because
she didn't have any problem giving birth to
him.
Back in the dorm, Evan goes through his journals
again.
While reading through the part when Mr Miller
was filming him and Kayleigh, Thumper stops
him, arguing that there could be a good reason
he repressed those memories.
Evan goes back to his hometown to see Kayleigh,
who now works at a diner.
After getting reacquainted, Evan starts telling
her that he has been recovering some of his
lost memories.
When he asks her about the time Mr Miller
was filming them, Kayleigh got mad at him
for bringing it up.
Evan tells her that she shouldn't hate herself
for anything wrong that might have happened
that time, but Kayleigh gets even more upset.
Kayleigh tells Evan that talking about that
incident doesn't make her feel any better.
As she walks away, she turns back to Evan
and asks him why he didn't keep in touch with
her if he thought she was so wonderful.
When Evan gets back to the dorm, he hears
an angry voice message from Tommy, telling
him that Kayleigh had taken her own life the
night they met.
He goes to the funeral, but he only watches
it from a distance.
After everyone had left, he leaves behind
some flowers and the old note containing his
promise to return for Kayleigh.
Evan starts reading from his journals again
to test his theory that his flashbacks really
allow him to change the past.
After reading a few phrases from his notes,
he goes back to the moment when Mr Miller
invited him to the basement to shoot a movie.
As Mr Miller prepares the camera, he tells
the children that they will be kissing in
the film, so he instructs them to take their
clothes off.
Evan tells Kayleigh to cover her ears and
starts berating Mr Miller for his depravity.
He warns Mr Miller that his activities would
eventually lead to Kayleigh's suicide and
threatens to castrate him if he doesn't stop.
When Evan wakes up, he finds himself in a
girl's dorm room, and he immediately experiences
flashes of memories that seem to have happened
after he confronted Mr Miller.
Kayleigh wakes up beside him and notices that
his nose is bleeding.
After getting cleaned up, he and Kayleigh
walk together to go to class.
When Evan asked about Mr Miller's camera,
Kayleigh told him that her dad got rid of
it the same day he got it.
While leaving his message for his mom on the
phone, he sees Thumper in the hallway.
When he asks him for the time, he finds out
that Thumper isn't very fond of him.
He later learns that he is now friends with
the frat boys who bullied Thumper at the bar.
Evan sets up a romantic evening with Kayleigh,
but the evening was spoiled when he hears
that someone has trashed his car.
He and Kayleigh notice a dog collar hanging
from the rearview mirror, and they both figure
out that it was Tommy who caused the damage.
The couple goes back to Evan's dorm to find
something he could use for self-defense, but
all he could see was a pepper spray.
Kayleigh assures Evan that Tommy wouldn't
hurt him.
Evan reminds her that Tommy killed his dog.
He argues that Tommy's bad behavior couldn't
just be a result of a bad upbringing because
Kayleigh turned out fine.
Kayleigh stressed that her father never harmed
her and asserted that Mr Miller had taken
out all of his anger on Tommy.
Evan decides to stay with Kayleigh in her
room, but Tommy confronts them as they walk
to the dorm.
Tommy starts beating up Evan with a bat.
Evan manages to incapacitate Tommy with a
pepper spray and beats him while he's down.
After punching Tommy a few times, he grabs
the bat and hits him in the head, killing
him instantly.
Evan is sent to prison for killing Tommy.
After entering his jail cell, he immediately
asks his cellmate, Carlos, for protection.
Carlos, who is quite religious, refuses and
advises Evan to close his eyes and go somewhere
else in his mind when other prisoners start
abusing him.
Andrea pays Evan a visit to tell him about
the case and bring him his journals.
She was only able to bring two books as the
others are still kept in storage.
Before Evan could even take his books to his
cell, other inmates take them from him.
Evan was able to rip out a few pages from
the books before the other prisoners could
take them away.
He uses the pages he kept to go back in time
to convince Carlos to help him get the rest
of his journals back.
Evan flashes back to the day when he drew
the picture of a man holding a knife.
He impales both his hands on pointed paper
holders to convince Carlos that he is experiencing
stigmata.
When Evan wakes up, Carlos sees the scars
and decides to help him.
Evan goes to the inmates' cell that took his
journals and asked them to let him join their
gang.
He agrees to pleasure them as part of the
initiation, but as soon as he kneels, he stabs
them both.
Carlos comes in to hold down the gate of the
cell as Evan reads from his journal.
He soon returns to the moment when Tommy was
about to burn his dog.
He gives Lenny a sharp piece of metal and
persuades him to cut the rope when he sees
the dog in the sack.
When they reach the yard, Evan confronts Tommy
and convinces him to let the dog go.
Lenny, however, walks toward Tommy while he's
releasing the dog and stabs him with the metal
shard.
Evan wakes up back in his dorm room and starts
convulsing as new memories flash into his
head.
He is taken to the hospital and undergoes
some tests.
As the doctor explains the results to Andrea,
Evan interrupts him and asserts that he had
inserted 40 years worth of memory in his brain
in one year.
He steals a security key from the doctor and
goes to see Lenny in his room.
Lenny just stares into space as Evan tries
to talk to him.
As Evan was about to leave, Lenny asks him
if he knew that something would happen when
he handed him the metal shard.
When Evan said yes, Lenny tells him that he
should be the one locked up in the psych ward.
Evan decides to revisit the moment when he
met with his dad in the hospital.
During the meeting, he tries to ask his father
to tell him how he could make things right.
His father tells him that it's impossible
because he can't change people without destroying
a part of their identity.
Evan insists on using his abilities to make
things better, so Jason lunges at the boy
and strangles him.
Upon his return from the flashback, Evan goes
back to his hometown to find Kayleigh.
He tries to look for her at the diner but
finds out that she never worked there.
Evan soon learns that she is now working as
a prostitute.
He visits her at the motel, takes her to the
diner, and tells her about his ability.
Kayleigh refuses to believe him, so he goes
back to his dorm and reads from his journal
again.
This time, Evan uses his ability to stop the
woman from opening the mailbox.
He runs toward the house and tells the lady
to stay away from the mailbox.
Frustrated by Evan's decision to warn the
lady, Tommy shields the woman and her baby
from the blast so he would come out as a hero.
Evan, who is standing next to the mailbox,
gets blown away by the explosion.
Evan returns to his dorm room and sees Lenny
on the next bed instead of Thumper.
As soon as Evan realizes that he had lost
his limbs, he starts convulsing from the surge
of new memories flashing into his mind.
In those flashes, Evan finds out that Kayleigh
and Lenny have become lovers.
He later meets Tommy, who is now a member
of a religious group.
While spending some time alone with Kayleigh,
he asks her whether they could've been together
as a couple.
Kayleigh tells him that he was the first person
he ever cared about.
She went on to say that Evan was the reason
she stayed with her dad instead of her mom,
even though she didn't like being with her
father.
Evan tells her that nobody could love her
the way that he does.
Feeling depressed from losing Kayleigh to
Lenny, Evan tries to drown himself in the
bathtub.
Tommy saves him and tells him not to give
up hope.
Tommy takes Evan to the hospital to see Andrea,
who is now suffering from lung cancer.
Evan remembers from the flashes that his mom
had started chain-smoking after he lost his
limbs.
He suddenly gets the idea to go back in time
and destroy the dynamite so he doesn't get
blown up.
Evan fails in his first attempt to destroy
the dynamite and tries again.
In his second attempt, he goes back to the
moment when Mr Miller was preparing to shoot
a movie with them in the basement.
When he finds the dynamite, he lights it up
near the fireplace.
Mr Miller quickly runs toward him and smacks
the explosive out of his hand.
It rolls toward Kayleigh, and she picks it
up.
The dynamite explodes in her hand, and Evan
ends up in a psych ward upon his return.
Eager to try again, Evan goes to the doctor's
office to ask for his journals.
The doctor tells him that the journals never
existed.
He pointed out that Evan was just like his
father, who kept asking him for a photo album
that he never had.
When Andrea comes for a visit, he asks her
about the home movies he used to watch and
tells her that he'd like to see them again.
Once it went dark, Evan quickly snuck into
the doctor's office and started writing a
goodbye note.
He watches a home movie of his pregnant mom
at the hospital before she gives birth to
him.
He goes back to that moment when he was still
in the womb.
On her way to the delivery room, Andrea suddenly
feels a sharp pain in her womb.
As the doctors observe the baby's condition
on the ultrasound, they find out that the
umbilical cord is choking him.
Andrea tells the doctor to save the baby,
but they eventually lose him.
Evan’s friends lived very peaceful lives
in his absence.
Kayleigh and Tommy went to live with their
mother and avoided getting abused by their
father.
Andrea had remarried and had another baby.
Lenny had never suffered from any trauma.
Tommy becomes a valedictorian of his class,
and Kayleigh gets married.